[SYCL][Doc] Introduce test plan for free function kernels extension (#17886)
intel/llvm: sycl/test-e2e/FreeFunctionKernels/test-plan.md

Perform tests on new traits for free function kernels which should check the following:
 - that `is_nd_range_kernel_v` trait returns true if function declaration is decorated with `nd_range_kernel` property and false if it is not.

 - that `is_single_task_kernel_v` trait returns true function if declaration is decorated with `single_task_kernel` and false if it is not.

- that `is_kernel_v` trait returns true for function whose declaration is decorated with either the `nd_range_kernel` property or the `single_task_kernel` property when it is not then it returns false.

Perform tests on new kernel bundle member functions for free function kernels which should check the following:

- that `get_kernel_id` member function returns valid kernel identifier that is associated with that kernel.

- that `get_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt)` member function returns kernel bundle in which associated free function kernel can be found.

- that `get_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt, const std::vector<device>& devs)` member function returns kernel bundle in which associated free function kernel can be found.

> - that `has_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt)` returns true when free function kernel can be represent in a device image of state and free function kernel is compatible with at least one of the devices in context.

Reviewer: typo "represent" -> "represented. 
Same for the two following bullet points.

Author: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/17886/commits/ac28fa9e4df707f103329d6d8395f782ef0ebaf1

- that `has_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt, const std::vector<device>& devs)` returns true when free function kernel can be represent in a device image of state and free function kernel is compatible with at least one of the devices.

- that `has_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt, const std::vector<device>& devs)` returns true when free function kernel can be represent in a device image of state and free function kernel is compatible with at least one of the devices.

- that `is_compatible(const device& dev)` returns true when free function kernel is compatible with the device.

- that `ext_oneapi_has_kernel()` returns true only if the kernel bundle contains the free function kernel.

- that `ext_oneapi_has_kernel(const device &dev)` returns true when kernel bundle contains the free function kernel and if that kernel is compatible with the device.

- that `ext_oneapi_get_kernel` returns the kernel object representing that kernel if the free function kernel resides in this kernel bundle. 

- that `ext_oneapi_get_kernel` throws exception with the error code `errc::invalid` if the free function kernel does not reside in this kernel bundle.

> 

Reviewer: I suggest adding a test mixing free function kernels with lambda defined kernels. Then, verify that `get_kernel_ids` returns all of the kernels defined in the source, regardless of how they were defined.

Author: I've added it this way, though I'm not sure if this is what you had in mind?
https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/17886/commits/ac28fa9e4df707f103329d6d8395f782ef0ebaf1

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps add a check that `info::kernel::num_args` returns the correct value?

Author: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/17886/commits/ac28fa9e4df707f103329d6d8395f782ef0ebaf1

Perform tests on new free functions to query kernel information descriptors which should check the following:

- that `get_kernel_info(const context& ctxt)` produces the same result as would be computed by 
    ```
    auto bundle = sycl::get_kernel_bundle<Func, sycl::bundle_state::executable>(ctxt);
    auto ret = bundle.ext_oneapi_get_kernel<Func>().get_info<Param>()`
    ```

- that `get_kernel_info(const context& ctxt, const device& dev)` produces the same result as would be computed by 
    ```
    auto bundle =
      sycl::get_kernel_bundle<Func, sycl::bundle_state::executable>(ctxt);
    auto ret = bundle.ext_oneapi_get_kernel<Func>().get_info<Param>(dev);
    ```

- that ` get_kernel_info(const queue& q)` produces the same result as would be computed by 
    ```
    sycl::context ctxt = q.get_context();
    sycl::device dev = q.get_device();
    auto bundle =
    sycl::get_kernel_bundle<Func, sycl::bundle_state::executable>(ctxt);
    auto ret = bundle.ext_oneapi_get_kernel<Func>().get_info<Param>(dev);
    ```

### End-to-end tests

> 

Reviewer: Maybe we should also add some tests about parameters that are structs that contain accessor, local_accessor etc...?

Author: I've added it this way, though I'm not sure if this is what you had in mind?
https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/17886/commits/ac28fa9e4df707f103329d6d8395f782ef0ebaf1

Author: Yes, we should be able to.

- that `ext_oneapi_get_kernel` throws exception with the error code `errc::invalid` if the free function kernel does not reside in this kernel bundle.

Perform tests on new free functions to query kernel information descriptors which should check the following:

- that `get_kernel_info(const context& ctxt)` produces the same result as would be computed by 
    ```
    auto bundle = sycl::get_kernel_bundle<Func, sycl::bundle_state::executable>(ctxt);
    auto ret = bundle.ext_oneapi_get_kernel<Func>().get_info<Param>()`
    ```

- that `get_kernel_info(const context& ctxt, const device& dev)` produces the same result as would be computed by 
    ```
    auto bundle =
      sycl::get_kernel_bundle<Func, sycl::bundle_state::executable>(ctxt);
    auto ret = bundle.ext_oneapi_get_kernel<Func>().get_info<Param>(dev);
    ```

- that ` get_kernel_info(const queue& q)` produces the same result as would be computed by 
    ```
    sycl::context ctxt = q.get_context();
    sycl::device dev = q.get_device();
    auto bundle =
    sycl::get_kernel_bundle<Func, sycl::bundle_state::executable>(ctxt);
    auto ret = bundle.ext_oneapi_get_kernel<Func>().get_info<Param>(dev);
    ```

> ### End-to-end tests

Author: I agree, I have added to test plan to check for diagnostics which should be emitted if declared free function kernel does not meet requirements.

I am not exactly sure what you mean by negative case. Could you provide an example ?

> ### End-to-end tests

Author: Sure, I can add it to the test plan to check for illegal use of free function kernels.

> ### End-to-end tests

Author: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/17886/commits/ac28fa9e4df707f103329d6d8395f782ef0ebaf1

# Test plan for [`sycl_ext_oneapi_free_function_kernels`][spec-link] extension

## Testing scope

### Device coverage

The tests should be launched on every supported device configuration we have.

### Type coverage

> New APIs for new way to define a kernel as a simple C++ function, where the kernel arguments are parameters to this function described by the extension can take only allowed kernel parameter type as specified in section [4.12.4 of the SYCL 2020 specification](https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#sec:kernel.parameter.passing) with exceptions to parameters of type `reducer` or `kernel_handler`. 

Author: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/18235

 - that if a function is decorated with more than one of these properties, it will result in a compilation error.
 - that if a redeclaration of a function is decorated with the same property but with different arguments, the program should result in a compilation error.

#### Perform tests on new traits for free function kernels which should check the following:
- that `is_nd_range_kernel_v` trait should be a subclass of `true_type` if function declaration is decorated with `nd_range_kernel` property or a subclass of `false_type` if it is not.
- that `is_single_task_kernel_v` trait should be a subclass of `true_type` if declaration is decorated with `single_task_kernel` or a subclass of `false_type` if it is not.
- that `is_kernel_v` trait should be a subclass of `true_type` for function whose declaration is decorated with either the `nd_range_kernel` property or the `single_task_kernel` property when it is not then it should be a subclass of `false_type`.

#### Perform tests on new `kernel_bundle` member functions for free function kernels by declaring `nd_range_kernel` and `single_task_kernel` and verifying that:

> - the `get_kernel_id` member function returns a valid kernel identifier associated with free function kernel.

Author: I understand "valid" as `kernel_id` of free function kernel that can be found within all kernel identifiers for any free function kernels defined by the application which can be queried using  `get_kernel_ids()`.

> - the `get_kernel_id` member function returns a valid kernel identifier associated with free function kernel.

Reviewer 2: > I understand "valid" as `kernel_id` of free function kernel that can be found within all kernel identifiers for any free function kernels defined by the application which can be queried using `get_kernel_ids()`.

I think that it is worth adding to the test plan doc

> - the `get_kernel_id` member function returns a valid kernel identifier associated with free function kernel.

Author: Sure, I will do :)

    ```
    auto bundle = sycl::get_kernel_bundle<Func, sycl::bundle_state::executable>(ctxt);
    auto ret = bundle.ext_oneapi_get_kernel<Func>().get_info<Param>();
    ```

- that `get_kernel_info(const context& ctxt, const device& dev)` produces the same result as would be computed by 
    ```
    auto bundle =
      sycl::get_kernel_bundle<Func, sycl::bundle_state::executable>(ctxt);
    auto ret = bundle.ext_oneapi_get_kernel<Func>().get_info<Param>(dev);
    ```

- that ` get_kernel_info(const queue& q)` produces the same result as would be computed by 
    ```
    sycl::context ctxt = q.get_context();
    sycl::device dev = q.get_device();
    auto bundle =
      sycl::get_kernel_bundle<Func, sycl::bundle_state::executable>(ctxt);
    auto ret = bundle.ext_oneapi_get_kernel<Func>().get_info<Param>(dev);
    ```

#### Perform tests on use of illegal types for kernel paramters:
- that a class type `S` with a virtual base class of type `T` can not be used as free function kernel parameter type.
- that a class type `S` with a virtual member function can not be used as free function kernel parameter type.

> ### End-to-end tests

Reviewer 2: The extension also allows to call a free function kernel from another kernel, or from a host function and in that case it should behave as a regular host and/or device function - we should also have tests for this as well.

Author: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/18235

A series of checks should be performed that we can pass struct that contain one of the following `accessor`, `local_accessor`, `sampled_image_accessor` or  `unsampled_image_accessor` types as kernel parameter to free function kernel and use it within kernel.

#### Test `struct` defined at namespace scope as kernel parameter:
A series of checks should be performed that we can pass `struct` as kernel parameter and use it within kernel.

#### Test `class` defined at namespace scope as kernel parameter:
A series of checks should be performed that we can pass `class` as kernel parameter and use it within kernel.

#### Test scoped enumeration defined at namespace scope as kernel parameter:
A series of checks should be performed that we can pass scoped enumeration as kernel parameter and use it within kernel.

#### Test unscoped enumeration that has an explicit underlying type defined at namespace scope as kernel parameter:
A series of checks should be performed that we can pass unscoped enumeration that has an explicit underlying type as kernel parameter and use it within kernel.

#### Test type aliases to allowed kernel paramater types as kernel parameter:

> A series of checks should be performed that we can pass type aliases to allowed kernel paramater types as kernel parameter and use it within kernel.

Reviewer 2: I would move this check into unit-tests, type aliases do not have any effect on the program or on the compilation flow other than during parsing/semantics checking step.

Author: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/18235

#### Interaction with additional kernel properties:

> A series of checks should be performed to check that to the free function kernels may also be decorated with the properties defined in `sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties`. This test should perform simple checks verifying if applied kernel_properties work within defined kernels.

Reviewer 2: The extension spec says:

> As with standard SYCL kernels, these kernel properties can be queried via `kernel::get_info` using either the `info::kernel::attributes` information descriptor or the `info::kernel_device_specific` information descriptors.

That means that `sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::get_kernel_info` should also work with these properties and we need to test it.

Author: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/18235

# Test plan for [`sycl_ext_oneapi_free_function_kernels`][spec-link] extension

## Testing scope

### Device coverage

The tests should be launched on every supported device configuration we have.

### Type coverage
New APIs for new way to define a kernel as a simple C++ function, where the kernel arguments are parameters to this function described by the extension can take only allowed kernel parameter type as specified in section 4.12.4 "Rules for parameter passing to kernels" of the core SYCL specification with exceptions to parameters of type `reducer` or `kernel_handler`. 

Therefore those tests should be structured in a way that checks are performed on all allowed kernel parameter types to ensure that everything works correctly.

## Tests

### Unit tests

> Tests in this category may not fully exercise the extension functionality, but are instead they are focused on making sure that all APIs are consistent with respect to other APIs.

Reviewer 3: What are "other" in this case? Something like:
```suggestion
Tests in this category may not fully exercise the extension functionality, but are instead they are focused on making sure that all APIs are consistent with respect to existing APIs.
```

Perform tests on free function kernels requirments which should check the following:
 - that compiler will emit diagnostic when free function kernel is declared with reference types as parameters.
  
 - that compiler will emit diagnostic when free function kernel is declared with variadic arguments.

 - that compiler will emit diagnostic when free function kernel provides default parameter values.

 - that compiler will emit diagnostic when free function kernel return type is not `void`.

 - that compiler will emit diagnostic when a non-static member function is used as a kernel. Only static member function at class scope are allowed as free function kernel.

Perform tests on new traits for free function kernels which should check the following:

>  - that `is_nd_range_kernel_v` trait returns true if function declaration is decorated with `nd_range_kernel` property and false if it is not.

Author: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/17886/commits/34915254769e63cc28fc2b61b82482d4203cc36a

 - that `is_single_task_kernel_v` trait returns true function if declaration is decorated with `single_task_kernel` and false if it is not.

- that `is_kernel_v` trait returns true for function whose declaration is decorated with either the `nd_range_kernel` property or the `single_task_kernel` property when it is not then it returns false.

> Perform tests on new kernel bundle member functions for free function kernels which should check the following:
> 
> - that `get_kernel_id` member function returns valid kernel identifier that is associated with that kernel.
> 
> - that `get_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt)` member function returns kernel bundle in which associated free function kernel can be found.
> 
> - that `get_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt, const std::vector<device>& devs)` member function returns kernel bundle in which associated free function kernel can be found.
> 
> - that `has_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt)` returns true when free function kernel can be represented in a device image of state and free function kernel is compatible with at least one of the devices in context.
> 
> - that `has_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt, const std::vector<device>& devs)` returns true when free function kernel can be represented in a device image of state and free function kernel is compatible with at least one of the devices.
> 
> - that `has_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt, const std::vector<device>& devs)` returns true when free function kernel can be represented in a device image of state and free function kernel is compatible with at least one of the devices.
> 
> - that `is_compatible(const device& dev)` returns true when free function kernel is compatible with the device.
> 
> - that `ext_oneapi_has_kernel()` returns true only if the kernel bundle contains the free function kernel.
> 
> - that `ext_oneapi_has_kernel(const device &dev)` returns true when kernel bundle contains the free function kernel and if that kernel is compatible with the device.
> 
> - that `ext_oneapi_get_kernel` returns the kernel object representing that kernel if the free function kernel resides in this kernel bundle. 
> 
> - that `ext_oneapi_get_kernel` throws exception with the error code `errc::invalid` if the free function kernel does not reside in this kernel bundle.
> 
> - that `get_kernel_ids()` returns all of the kernels defined in the source, whether they were defined as free function kernels, lambda expressions or named kernel objects.
> 
> - that `info::kernel::num_args` returns  the number of parameters in the function definition of free function kernel.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Perform tests on new `kernel_bundle` member functions for free function kernels which should check that:

    - the `get_kernel_id` member function returns a valid kernel identifier that is associated with that kernel.
    
    - the `get_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt)` member function returns a kernel bundle in which the associated free function kernel can be found.
    
    - the `get_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt, const std::vector<device>& devs)` member function returns a kernel bundle in which the associated free function kernel can be found.
    
    - the `has_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt)` returns true when a free function kernel can be represented in a device image in the corresponding state and the associated free function kernel is compatible with at least one of the devices in `ctxt`.
    
    - the `has_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt, const std::vector<device>& devs)` returns true when free function kernel can be represented in a device image in the corresponding state and free function kernel is compatible with at least one of the devices in `devs`.
    
    - the `has_kernel_bundle(const context& ctxt, const std::vector<device>& devs)` returns true when free function kernel can be represented in a device image in the corresponding state and free function kernel is compatible with at least one of the devices in `devs`.
    
    - the `is_compatible(const device& dev)` returns true when the associated free function kernel is compatible with `dev`.
    
    - the `ext_oneapi_has_kernel()` returns true only if the kernel bundle contains the associated free function kernel.
    
    - the `ext_oneapi_has_kernel(const device &dev)` returns true when kernel bundle contains the associated free function kernel and if that kernel is compatible with `dev`.
    
    - the `ext_oneapi_get_kernel` returns the kernel object representing that kernel if the free function kernel resides in this kernel bundle. 
    
    - the `ext_oneapi_get_kernel` throws exception with the error code `errc::invalid` if the associated free function kernel does not reside in this kernel bundle.
    
    - the `get_kernel_ids()` returns all of the kernels defined in the source, whether they were defined as free function kernels, lambda expressions or named kernel objects.
    
    - the `info::kernel::num_args` returns  the number of parameters in the function definition of the associated free function kernel.
```

> 

Reviewer: Add another test where repeat all these checks but for free function kernel that is only declared in the main translation unit but defined in another one. We can two kernels in the same file for example, one defined explicitly in the file and the other declared in the file but defined elsewhere. Then, all these functions will have to be called on both kernels. Note, I think you will have to do linking explicitly in the `llvm-lit` commands in order to link with the the definition of the second kernel.

Author: I described it like this  https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/6a341c9f20cdc7576044b607d0b2dd33fb7a2f30/sycl/test-e2e/FreeFunctionKernels/test-plan.md?plain=1#L73 
If you had something else in mind let me know I will fix it.

- that `ext_oneapi_get_kernel` returns the kernel object representing that kernel if the free function kernel resides in this kernel bundle. 

- that `ext_oneapi_get_kernel` throws exception with the error code `errc::invalid` if the free function kernel does not reside in this kernel bundle.

- that `get_kernel_ids()` returns all of the kernels defined in the source, whether they were defined as free function kernels, lambda expressions or named kernel objects.

- that `info::kernel::num_args` returns  the number of parameters in the function definition of free function kernel.

- that performs all the checks mentioned above on a free function kernel that is declared in one translation unit and defined in a separate one.

Perform tests on new free functions to query kernel information descriptors which should check the following:

- that `get_kernel_info(const context& ctxt)` produces the same result as would be computed by 
    ```
    auto bundle = sycl::get_kernel_bundle<Func, sycl::bundle_state::executable>(ctxt);

>     auto ret = bundle.ext_oneapi_get_kernel<Func>().get_info<Param>()`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    auto ret = bundle.ext_oneapi_get_kernel<Func>().get_info<Param>();
```

    ```

- that `get_kernel_info(const context& ctxt, const device& dev)` produces the same result as would be computed by 
    ```
    auto bundle =
      sycl::get_kernel_bundle<Func, sycl::bundle_state::executable>(ctxt);
    auto ret = bundle.ext_oneapi_get_kernel<Func>().get_info<Param>(dev);
    ```

- that ` get_kernel_info(const queue& q)` produces the same result as would be computed by 
    ```
    sycl::context ctxt = q.get_context();
    sycl::device dev = q.get_device();
    auto bundle =
    sycl::get_kernel_bundle<Func, sycl::bundle_state::executable>(ctxt);
    auto ret = bundle.ext_oneapi_get_kernel<Func>().get_info<Param>(dev);
    ```

Perform tests on use of illegal types for kernel paramters:

> - that A class type S with a virtual base class of type T can not be used as free function kernel parameter type.
> - that A class type S with a virtual member function can not be used as free function kernel parameter type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- that a class type `S` with a virtual base class of type `T` can not be used as free function kernel parameter type.
- that a class type `S` with a virtual member function can not be used as free function kernel parameter type.
```

### End-to-end tests

Tests in this category perform some meaningful actions with the extension to
see that the extension works in a scenarios which mimic real-life usage of the
extension.

With the exception of the`single_task_kernel` free function kernels, all subsequent tests are executed with Dimensions = 1, 2, 3. 

In all subsequent tests, free function kernels should be declared within a namespace, as static member functions of a class, or in the global namespace.

#### Test `accessor` as kernel parameter:
A series of tests should be performed that `accessor` is supported when
templated with `target::device`, inside free function kernel when passed as kernel parameter.

#### Test `USM` pointer as kernel parameter:
A series of checks should be performed that USM memory with three types of memory allocations `host`, `device` and `shared` is supported inside free function kernel when passed as kernel parameter.

#### Test `id` as kernel parameter:

> A series of checks should be performed that we can pass `id` with different dimensions = 1, 2, 3 as kernel parameter to free function kernel and use it within kernel. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A series of checks should be performed that we can pass `id<Dimensions>` where `Dimensions` is in {1, 2, 3} as kernel parameter to free function kernel and use it within kernel. 
```

#### Test `range` as kernel parameter:

> A series of checks should be performed that we can pass `range` with different dimensions = 1, 2, 3 as kernel parameter to free function kernel and use it within kernel.

Reviewer 3: Same as above.

Author: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/17886/commits/34915254769e63cc28fc2b61b82482d4203cc36a
